so this is an example of a video a short
video that's actually shorter this
channel I don't have that much to say
about this topic but maybe it's a little
bit deep maybe it's a little bit
interesting maybe maybe Melissa could
throw in some thoughts though
I got you've been warned
I got a message from his Porter on
patreon and he asked the question
sincerely enough why don't I talk more
about global warming I have had a couple
of videos of the global warming the main
one I remember was actually in response
to vegan gains so I'm sure you can get
it on the vegan gains playlist my
responses to it discourage the vegan
gains uh there were some technical and
scientific issues I want to talk about
irritable boring in that video and it's
come up a few other times but anyway he
phrased this question such a way as
global warming is such an enormous issue
it's an issue that's gonna have
consequences for you and me and the next
generation and my own daughter etc etc
so why not say more about global warming
and I think you already know my answer
on this this topic babe and you know for
me the answer this it's a little bit
deep a little bit of resonant because
it's part of the frame in which I've
lived my entire life like if you asked
the question why did I end up studying
an obscure language like poly and not
ancient Greek or Latin one of the main
reasons was my perception of the world
back in 1997 was that they were already
was an enormous well-funded
establishment dedicated to the study of
ancient Greek and Latin maybe I'm wrong
I mean you know now I'm much more
cynical in my own form in 2018 looking
back now probably I could have been a
scholar of Latin and Greek and set the
world on fire and brought those peoples
on didn't know yeah but like from my you
know podunk ignorant perspective 1997 I
thought okay there already are these
specialists and experts devoted to
ancient Greek and Latin and they
probably started studying those
languages at age 12 and I'm never gonna
be able to compete so why would I try to
compete yeah why wouldn't I try to do
something instead positive for Cambodia
Sri Lanka Laos these places the dirt I
think it's probably why you don't
about nutrition because you're not a
nutritionist right oh okay right but
there's like a implicit there it's not
just that I'm not a nutritionist
it's that there is an establishment of
well-funded well-educated experts who
were in that field and who make money
out of it right I mean like the fact
that I'm not a nutritionist is not
enough of a reason that's been good but
now contrast this okay when I wrote my
first article is my first public
published articles dealing with politics
in Laos was I great expert on Laos or
lotion no was I a great expert on
humanitarian work and corruption
political problems in Laos or Southeast
Asia no but nevertheless I was one of
the best informed people in the world
who spoken which is the first luck with
this there isn't an establishment like
there's an establishment of experts in
Greek there's establishment of recent of
experts in Latin there's an
establishment of experts in nutrition
right and and me in all three cases they
may all be not cases I mean they now I'm
older and I'm more cynical in 1997 I
didn't see it the way in 1997 I never
would have thought you know what
you know the guys doing these studies in
Greek and Latin this is all garbage and
I can wipe the slate clean I can replace
this with new and better scholarship
today I probably would have responded
that more ambitiously
and I would have wanted to challenge
that establishment but from my more
youthful perspective it was like well
why challenge it why reduplicate the
efforts that are already there and so on
right situation like Laos situation like
Cambodia situation like Pali scholarship
ancient Buddhist scholarship not the
case at all I mean in many ways those
are still fields where you know there's
no competition they're still in their
infancy there is no establishment the
very few translations that are out there
are terrible the very few sources and
resources and where my perspective and
the information I have to share may
really be invaluable in the sense that
there's no substitute for it there
weren't there were not five other people
in Laos who could have written the
article I wrote about corruption in the
you know in the charity industry there
weren't you know and of course I met the
of
people who are you find out why they
didn't see what weren't you the guy I
wrote that article you know why was it
me you know you if you meet those few
other people face to face a lot of them
you know had connections or had
financial situations they didn't want to
endanger their own position by speaking
honestly about about such a yeah okay so
I think the number one vegans were sorry
I I'm just using nutrition as an example
do it but you know dr. Greger is doing
the word he's reading scientific
articles making videos ever almost every
day he's really at it every day and
there are a lot of people on YouTube
already that are vegan youtubers that
just pair it the same studies or a
parent the same results that he oh god
is that the truth yeah right so like I
in that same sense that there are plenty
of people who are parroting the same
issues about the warming yeah so like
there are no I think there are enough
channels talking about I don't know you
well it could be something that you
could talk about more I do remember one
video that you made was pretty left an
impact on me well you were talking about
like um it shouldn't be about at least
this is how I interpret it it shouldn't
be about reducing your impact as much
you can and that did have I'm sitting
impact a lot but whatever it did have an
impact on me because for a long time I
had been thinking like okay how can we
reduce as much as possible like I was
really into and I think it is good I
think it is like a positive thing to try
to reduce your waste as much as you can
but as much as I could I wouldn't use
reviews containers and go to the grocery
store and try to buy things in bulk
which guys still do that but um you know
like I was really still feeling guilty
about the impact that I was having on
the environment just from like you know
buying a plastic bag like oh you know
I'm contributing to all this harm in the
world like well you know it and it can
lead to just like
it's better for me to just be dead I
wouldn't be having an impact from the
environment how dare I
how dare I write this essay using a
disposable pack and its kind of
mentality right what if the essay really
has some kind of positive value in the
world or even I suppose the value for
quote unquote saving the world what if
you're doing something positive
etc yeah so do I did a series of videos
talking about that yeah so and I did
really appreciate that so like I can
understand wanting more content talking
about that but I don't know what you
would I I don't know I don't know what
could you say well the one the one video
I made I just mentioned he does say
something quite shocking and I expect I
think from any people cuz tux with the
world of satellites and actually
deflecting the solar rays in the sky it
actually raises some points the other
thing most people hadn't heard about
that's that's what I would make that but
for me you know I think you raise a
second valid an interesting point this
issue of there already being people you
know echoing what dr. Greger is saying
there's already kind of chorus of
opinion following you know a few sources
in in veganism uh nutrition that's
interesting that's true
but what I'm really pointing you is just
the existence of the establishment
itself right so you and I both have seen
this YouTube channel for existence
Huntley for example there's a YouTube
channel which is specifically climate
scientists working on the Arctic methane
in a crisis the melting of ice on the
North Pole etc that are fine right right
and then dealing with the consequences
of methane being released from the ice
right and they're organized as a set of
dissidents within the larger community
of dedicated salary climate scientists
climate experts right so this is my
point now I I shared a house with one of
those people I'd say we were roommates
but we had separate rooms the hall we
rented a house in England with a woman
and she was a full-time employee of
exactly that of exactly that demi-monde
whatever you want to say she was part of
the climate science establishment so she
um you know you joke about it herself
she was actually you know producing all
these greenhouse
gasps is flying back and forth to
conferences in Switzerland and South
Africa and Australia and stuff she was
going to all these these you know
climate science conferences that did get
reported in the newspapers they were big
news at the time she was part of that of
that establishment now again the
establishment will have its flaws and
will need to have its critics the
nutrition establishment has its flaws
and needs to have its critics the
ancient Greek and Latin profession has
its flaws and needs to have its crypt
critics there's no doubt but for me
that's fundamentally a very different
situation that I was in at northern Laos
and even in the short time that I was
involved in Korean achieve way you have
no idea I mean very quickly you're in
the most informed 1% of Canadians just
if you care about and are studying
what's going on with Korea native way
people in Canada you know there should
be an establishment there should be
experts and what-have-you
who are involved in those problems you
know I was especially you you know the
issues that are in language extinction
and education but also economic and you
know other other political problems they
were facing so you know there again you
know there's almost immediately pressure
on me to speak out pressure on me to
lead research projects and so on i
member people say to me look we can get
funding for you right away if you want
to start doing this research project or
something and it was like um I've been a
student here for 3 months you know think
thanks but you know I thought I thought
it had more of a period of false
humility first before you know taking on
the composition so a lot of the issues
I've chosen to engage with are the
issues where my voice matters where the
absence of my voice would matter again
if I hadn't written that article in Laos
nobody else would have etc etc and you
know look and I've got to say also I do
think that is in some ways an immature
perspective of Hardman for sure that I
think that was like I say why didn't I
do Greek and Latin why did i do pally
you know we're looking back at it in
some ways I think it's stupid and I mean
nail in a situation where I'm 39 years
old I can read and write Chinese doing
all this work on reading on Chinese and
my opinion doesn't matter I'm one of a
million white guys
okay maybe not a million but in porpoise
number of white Westerners who speak
English is the first language you've
managed to get you know some level
ability in Chinese some knowledge of
Chinese politics etc and my opinion does
not matter my contribution doesn't
matter in that field what does matter
you know you have an extensive knowledge
of history and politics of oh oh I'm not
humble don't get me wrong
oh don't know I'm you know mic my voices
of tremendous unique out oh there's no
question yeah yeah yeah I'm not it to
make money and so on right but you know
my situation you know my contribution
will never be valued in that way it's
much much different to try to compete
and make your voice heard and make your
contribution matter if you want to
debate the future of Chinese politics
with over 1 billion people who are
involved Korean a jib way politics
they're not a lot of people in the room
there's a few dozen people you know
debating with you and your voice really
matters in the absence of your voice if
you can be an eloquent voice you know
for police reform or prison reform or
education reform or language extinction
or any of those issues connected First
Nations your contribution really matters
and in my experience it matters right
away it matters and you all have been at
it for a few months but you don't have a
whole lot of credential in your belt and
for me that that's like something like
global warming it's the worst case
scenario there's this huge well-funded
establishment already I'm not a part of
it I'm never gonna be a part of it I'm
never gonna benefit from it always gonna
be excluded by it okay well you know
that's that that's the situation there
yeah and then and then apart from that
so what what can i what could I possibly
contribute yeah I do understand you know
in this sense it is so urgent it seems
like the only thing that we should be
concerned about because like right first
of all we need we need a planet that can
sustain human life if it can't you know
if if some of these projections are true
that within you know the next hundred
years the just global economy is going
to be in shambles due to climate change
you know that is very serious and I
understand why it's at the forefront of
a lot of people's minds and maybe that's
you know that's part of this urging you
want yeah yeah yeah I assume the
question yeah I sympathize but I
disagree and you know to bring this back
to two names that happen to rhyme Cicero
and Mon Bo so I'm reading the ancient
Roman philosopher Cicero and in reading
Cicero I have to reflect a lot on the
relationship between democracy and
aristocracy and I was looking at some
work by this journalist George mom Bo
the other day I think George mom Bo is
an idiot I really do not even gonna get
into why but George mom Bo is in effect
like an aristocrat our society he's the
one person out of a million chosen
almost at random to be the ecology
reporter for a major newspaper in Europe
so I mean in all of you how many people
have that job in the whole
english-speaking world how many people
with a job how many people can keep it
for decades the way he has researching
and writing articles and publishing
books and it's a goddamn shame that job
went to such an idiot it really it
really is a shame that it didn't go to a
person of greater rigor honesty
thoroughness you know an intelligence
cousin ha I'm not even getting into this
has this guy's tracker though George mom
Bo he is however absolutely one of the
most important voices on global warming
and has been for decades and still is
and he has sometimes gone through in
detail reports from the United Nations
you know on global warming or from
specific bodies and he's really
criticized than appointed well wrong in
the reproach or you know with the same
with issues and he has an impact now
here's the sad facts George mumbling
he's not a climate scientist this is
also from he has no real formal
education he is just a reporter he's a
journalist what happens specialize in
these areas your opinion and my opinion
can never matter in the way George won't
be his opinion matters never and if you
take all that time I have a political
science background I could go through
the same reports from the United Nations
I could probably do a better critique
constructive criticism I could probably
could do better than George Monbiot
because George mom Bo is an idiot right
you know I could go through the same
staff so I could go through whether it's
scientific reports
political reports or you know panels
drawing the clues I could play that role
right but it wouldn't matter I would
have more of a positive impact on
ecology and global warming if I take
that same time and knit my own socks
because this is this is why I'm bringing
up this why I'm bringing up philosophy
of Cicero right this is part of the
tragedy of living in a society which is
still in bits and pieces aristocratic in
its nature this guy has been given this
you know status for life you know almost
magically you know he's one of like five
people in English people but maybe fewer
I can't even name five you know gods of
this he's he's a reporter on ecology and
so he has that power if I wanted to have
it was only a suit those issues the best
thing I could do after doing that
research would be to struggle to get
that my research into the hands of short
ROM Bo and pray that he reports on it
pray that he reports on it and gives a
citation to my blog or whatever I'm I'm
gonna post it so that's that's the cold
hard reality of how the establishment
works in Buddhist studies how many white
Western english-speaking people get to
be a professor of Buddhism in each
generation it's more than 15 but let's a
handful you know and they really do have
this power comparable to aristocrats and
they leave a huge shadow over this
generation and you know I mean that
there are ways in which you know Western
academia and even Western journalism
start to resemble aristocracy start to
resemble undeserved privilege just being
assigned to people arbitrarily and then
having these these kinds of impacts yeah
I just want to say I was thinking about
it recently you know your your mom sent
you an email saying that she had just
read about a report on sexual abuse in
humanitarian workers right and she said
this reminded me that you you wrote
something along these same lines ten
years ago you know why did that not get
more coverage and right yeah I mean
that's just how it is like you have
written something like yeah okay writing
is like some
things that you publish are incredible
yeah but how many people have read them
how many people are going to read them
and that's just how that's just how it
is
okay so I'll wrap the video with this
but you know you make a good point
although I disagree are seen from a
different perspective she's talking
about an article I did on corruption
sexual exploitation you know employees
of humanitarian agencies getting
underage girls pregnant in this con this
kind of situation in northern Laos
so that article did make a big impact it
made a huge impact with in Laos it made
a huge impact on the charity agencies
involved the agencies I was accusing I
was pointed the finger at whatever want
to say I was criticizing right and then
it had a big impact via the newspapers
in the donor countries so one of the
agencies was from France and the store
was picked up and run in France and then
one was a Norway so in Norway Finland
and Denmark I think the story got picked
up also right so no so it's totally I
told you why you see it that way you see
it as me heroically writing this article
and then not having anything I would
totally understand but action but
actually if you think about it this is
an example of a powerless voiceless
person having a huge impact especially
where it mattered and then the ultimate
impact was that it had an effect on the
ocean government itself the government
in that country Laos my message got
through to them which is a communist
dictatorship okay okay but this is my
point before no no no no but it isn't of
course there's limits I mean I don't
have as much impact as George Monbiot or
some other established journalist no
question but my fundamental point
throughout this video has been I don't
respond to the existence of the
establishment just with resentment nor
with resignation right the point was for
me to respond strategically and say okay
where can I make a difference so when I
when I moved to Canada last time when I
moved to Saskatchewan my first thought
was prison activism I'm gonna get
involved in prisoners no no I know maybe
I'm an unusual person nobody else does
that so okay I want to get involved with
prison activism prison education and
this kind of thing
political activism linked to prisons why
this is somewhere I can make a
difference and I would not have put the
same time or energy or effort into
global warming so again whether you see
this as empowering or disempowering what
your attitude is in response to the
existence of the establishment because
the establishment is real there is an
establishment of Greek and Latin
you know scholars do you see that as an
opportunity because for me hey I'm a I'm
a smart guy I could have gotten you know
scholarship to study in Greek and Latin
you could look at it positively say I
can use the establishment as a ladder I
can get ahead because this is this
establishment already creates
opportunities for me creates education
for me
whereas let me tell you something
languages like poly lotion and Cambodian
I taught myself with no teacher no
textbook made my own textbooks and posed
them to the Internet it was awful I'm
wonderful it was wonderful
also awful yeah you know with no
establishment total autodidact total
outsider you know very different
situation but how can I make my word
scandal how can I make my reading count
how can I make my research count and in
a very broad sense how can I make my
activism count so I make those decisions
strategically in response the existence
that establishment whether or not you
resent it ultimately is immaterial but
no I'm neither taking on the George
mumbos of this world nor am I taking on
the global warming establishment and
that's why that is not a major area of
critique or commentary on this channel